Chapter 003　　　　　　　　　　Three

“Wow, you’ve really torn it up nicely again.”

Laying Roku’s trousers flat on the tatami mat in the guest room, Noriko struggled desperately to suppress her laughter.

“If you’re going to laugh, just laugh already,” Roku snapped, now changed into a kimono, his cheeks twitching in irritation.

“Laugh? *Fufu*. I was just thinking—you’re still the same, recklessly charging ahead like a fool.”

“Gah! Don’t laugh!”

“But you just told me to! Anyway, you’ve been standing this whole time—why don’t you sit?”

“How can I?! My backside feels like it’s been rubbed raw with sandpaper!”

Though there was no bleeding, he could clearly feel the thin skin on his buttocks peeling away in strips; sitting on the floor was utterly unthinkable.

“And with all this commotion, I can’t even settle my poor rear in peace.”

After being run over by the tram, when they arrived at Hyakugawa Shuzō, firefighters were just packing up their hand pump and leaving. At the entrance, Jinbei’emon stood in a towering rage, berating maids and apprentices alike, his fury making his hair seem ready to burst from his scalp.

2.

“My backside feels like it’s been rubbed raw with sandpaper!” Though there was no bleeding, he could clearly feel the thin skin on his buttocks peeling away in strips; sitting on the floor was utterly unthinkable. “And with all this commotion, I can’t even settle my poor rear in peace.” After being run over by the tram, when they arrived at Hyakugawa Shuzō, firefighters were just packing up their hand pump and leaving. At the entrance, Jinbei’emon stood in a towering rage, berating maids and apprentices alike, his fury making his hair seem ready to burst from his scalp.

“Jinbei’emon-san was told, but someone saw a boy taking Inako-chan away. Do you know anything about it?”

“Well… maybe they eloped.”

“Eloped? To me, it looked more like a fire-scene thief making off with the loot!”

“A thief, sure—but more like a Robin Hood of thieves. You’re just too rigid-minded, Roku-san.”

“And why must you always put things so pointedly… Never mind. Aren’t you worried about your sister?”

“I’m so worried I can’t even swallow my rice,” said Noriko, crunching on a biscuit as she spoke. When she finished eating, she brushed the crumbs from her fingers, opened the sewing box beside her, and began threading a needle.

“You’re… going to mend it?”

“Of course. Even if it’s only provisional, I’m your fiancée, aren’t I?”

Just as Roku opened his mouth to reply, Noriko burst into laughter.

“Still, those holes in your pants—walking around with your butt completely hanging out!”

“Don’t say it!”

Roku turned bright red, steaming like a pressure cooker letting out *shuposhupo* bursts of vapor.

　　　　　　　　　　＊

“This… is Paradise?”

Inako narrowed her eyes into slits, gazing up at the Hōrai Butsugu-ten signboard glowing in the evening sun. Following reluctantly behind Kihachi, she stepped into the shop, where Bunshichi sat on a stool smoking a cigarette and reading the newspaper.

“Oh, Inako-chan, welcome—wait, what’s with your hair?”

Bunshichi widened his eyes behind his glasses. Inako patted her head and replied, “It’s… been quite a day.”

2.

The shop was unusually lively, and in one corner, four children were chatting and laughing. Among them was Yajiro, the boy who had shown her around the store the other day, grinning broadly with a dirty face. "Ah, Kinako-nee, welcome back!"

"What's with that weird hairstyle?" asked a girl with bangs parted in the middle and long hair hanging down.

"Miyaji-chan, that's rude!" The girl smacked Yajiro lightly on the head.

"What'd I do?"

"You're such an idiot, Miyaji-chan. Think before you speak."

At the bold girl’s remark, a younger-looking boy in striped clothes and a bespectacled girl with her hair tied back in a simple knot both nodded vigorously in agreement.

"Ito, Mitsu. Sorry, but could you two fix Inago’s hair out front?"

After exchanging a few words with Kihachi, the two girls grabbed Inako by the sleeve.

"Then let’s go. Uh… Kinako-san? Inago-san?"

"It’s *Inako*—*Hundred Rivers Inako*!"

As Inako was pulled outside, Kihachi said, "Yajiro and Sadakichi, come help me with some prep work," and led the remaining boys toward the back.

Inako sat on a bench, newspaper draped over her shoulders like a barber’s cape, while Ito snipped at her hair with scissors.

"Hmm… so you ran away with Kihachi-niisan, huh?"

Inako tried to protest, but Ito pressed her hand on her head. "Stay still."

"That’s not it. He said, ‘I’ll take you to Paradise,’ and I ended up here."

"Eh?! You mean… we’re dying?" Ito dropped her scissors.

---

2.

“It’s not that!” Inako cried, but even to herself, her words sounded exactly like someone confessing to elopement—only now did she realize it, and she flushed with embarrassment. Meanwhile, Mits held up a mirror, gazing at Inako with a wistful, almost pained expression, muttering under her breath, “Elopement… double suicide…”

“Here we go again. Mits always gets fired up over stories like that.”

“You should try indulging in a little romance yourself, Ito-chan? I hear *Golden Yaksha* is good.”

“I’d rather something funny. Nothing beats listening to rakugo at a yose theater.”

“Oh dear me. So Ito-chan doesn’t understand matters of the heart at all, does she?”

Mits teased in an affected feminine drawl. “Whatever,” Ito shot back, voice tight. “I’m just the girl who gets mocked by Yajiro all the time for having ‘no charm.’” She slashed off a stray lock with sharp emphasis.

“S-so anyway,” Inako interjected, fearing her ears might be next, “do you all come to Sakamoto-san’s house often?”

“Yeah. We get free lessons from Kihachi-niisan. We gather at night after finishing chores—call it the Night Study Meeting. Seems like lots of other households run similar gatherings too.”

“Well, Kihachi-niisan’s meetings do tend to veer off-topic pretty quickly…”

“Right. If anything comes up, it’s always ‘electricity, electricity’ this and that.”

Inako found this unexpected side of Kihachi strangely endearing—and couldn’t help bursting into laughter.

All the while, Ito made her final snips. After shaking off the newspaper, Inako peered into the mirror Mits held up. The uneven, flyaway strands were now neatly trimmed, sloping gently forward along the collar of her kimono.

---

2.

“It looks like I’ve turned into a kokeshi doll…”

Inako, on the verge of tears, was comforted by the two women: “You look adorable,” “It really suits you.” The sun had set during her haircut, and lamplight now spilled from inside the shop.

Staring at that lonely glow, she felt an unbearable restlessness welling up inside. What kind of commotion must be happening at the house in Fushimi right now? And how on earth should she face them when she returned?

Her anxieties were endless—especially with her wedding to Yōsuke just days away. One bizarre event after another had unfolded so rapidly that she felt as if she’d been swept far away from reality.

When she looked up at the night sky, the lamp inside the shop suddenly went out, plunging the surroundings into complete darkness.

Ito and Mits were nowhere to be seen. Inako peered into the darkened interior of the shop.

“Sakamoto-san?”

She called out, but there was no reply. At the back, she spotted the faint flicker of candlelight.

Swallowing hard, Inako stepped hesitantly into the eerily quiet shop, her legs heavy with dread.

Candles were lined up along the narrow earthen floor at the rear of the shop. Following the light, she saw they led from the earth-floored area into a side room, then onward from the room toward the staircase cabinet in the innermost part of the building.

Inako slipped off her clogs, stepped into the room, and called again softly from beneath the stairs:

“Sakamoto-san?”

Still, no answer. The second floor above was pitch black, invisible.

Gathering her courage, Inako ascended the staircase cabinet and entered the second-floor room. As expected, it was completely dark—she could make out nothing. Shivering under the strange, oppressive atmosphere—

*“So you’re Inako-chan, aren’t you?”*

2.

A boy’s voice, unfamiliar to her, echoed in the darkness, and Inako screamed.

“Don’t be so scared. I heard you wanted to go to Paradise—so I thought I’d take you there.”

“What… what do you mean?” Inako asked into the dark.

“I’ve already called Amida-sama. He’ll be coming to welcome you any moment now.”

“Paradise? Wait—I didn’t die, did I? When did I die?”

Just as she was completely overwhelmed by fear, a brilliant light suddenly flared outside the window.

“Now we set forth on our joyous journey to the Pure Land of ten trillion Buddhas! How splendid the path ahead!”

From within the light emerged Amida Nyorai, shining in radiant gold.

Surrounding the Buddha were countless bodhisattvas, swaying merrily atop clouds. Faced with a scene straight out of a *raigozu* painting she had once seen, Inako’s legs gave way entirely.

With a lively *don-chan don-chan*, music evoking Paradise drew nearer along with the approaching figures.

“Please spare me! I’m not ready yet—just a little more time!”

Inako cried out desperately, nearly shrieking, “Mannamanchan-an, Mannamanchan-an!”

“…I never thought she’d be this gullible.”

A voice came from behind. “Huh?” She whirled around—only for laughter to erupt all at once.

Sakamoto Kihachi, standing behind her, pulled off the black cloth he had been wearing. From inside the closet, Yajiro and Sadakichi emerged carrying a phonograph that had been playing the celestial music. Up from the foot of the stairs, Ito and Mitsu burst forth, laughing.

Still dazed and unable to comprehend what had happened, Inako stood frozen. Kihachi, sweating slightly at the temples, pointed to a box beside him.

“This. This is it—the magic lantern.”  

2.

On the stand sat a tin box shaped like a fish cake. Attached to the box was a tube, and from its forward lens, light stretched straight out the window, projecting an image of the Coming of Amida onto the broad white wall of the neighboring house.

The magic lantern was a device that worked by inserting translucent slides—called *genjōban*—between the lens and the light source; when illuminated, the painted images on the slides were enlarged and projected. Multiple slides could be combined, and by manually shifting them—as had been done just moments ago with the bodhisattva—it was possible to create the illusion of movement in the picture. Now that she understood the truth, Inako collapsed inwardly, all tension draining away.

“Big sister, you were really startled!”

Sadakichi, who hadn’t spoken a single word when they first met, smiled shyly. “So *you* were the one making that voice,” Inako said, gently pinching his cheeks. Just then, the projector flickered and went dark, plunging the room into blackness.

Yajiro swiftly struck a match and lit the oil lamp.

“Kihachi-niichan, your flashlight’s busted again, looks like.”

“I could’ve sworn I had plenty of dry cells… Maybe the brass plate’s acting up?”

Frowning slightly, Kihachi removed the flashlight from the magic lantern and replaced it with the oil lamp.

At that moment, Bunshichi arrived carrying a tray with rice balls and takazuke pickles. Watching the children leap at him with cheers and immediately stuff their mouths, Inako murmured quietly to Kihachi:

“So ‘Paradise’… that was just the magic lantern, huh.”

“Well, I *did* show you Paradise. Didn’t lie about that. Got a problem with it?”

Inako let out a deep sigh and tugged at Kihachi’s sleeve.

“…Are there more tricks like this?”

2.

When the *raigō-e* [image of Amida’s descent] ended, various magic lantern slides appeared on the wall—foreign landscapes, comical scenes of a mouse leaping into a sleeping man’s mouth, and more. During the theatrical scene from *Yoshitsune’s劝進帳 (Kanjin-chō)*, Yajiro and Sadakichi improvised voices, and Inako, clutching a rice ball in one hand, thoroughly enjoyed the magical world of the lantern.

Once the projections concluded, Inako gave a lecture to the children on how to catch mice. She had started it merely as a gesture of thanks, but to her surprise, the children loved it. As soon as Inako finished, Kihachi seized the still-warm momentum and launched into an impassioned explanation about the prophecies of the *Denki Mokuroku*.

“No way, that’s nonsense—lemons can’t possibly replace batteries!”

Itō laughed as she objected.

“No, apparently lemon juice works as an electrolyte. That’s why I tried building my own version of the *Denki Mokuroku*’s ‘Fifteenth: Lemon Bomb.’ It’s a celebratory timed bomb powered by lemons—when it goes off, confetti flies everywhere.”

“And just where would you use something like that?” asked Yajiro.

“Hold on, let me finish. Last month, a new bookstore opened on Sanjō Fu-yamachi. On opening day, I set the ‘Lemon Bomb’ right on top of their display stack of books, then hid behind a nearby shelf to watch.”

“And did it explode?” Sadakichi asked.

“No, not at all,” Kihachi replied flatly, shaking his head.

“It didn’t go off—instead, some shop clerk came along and just bit into the lemon… My hard-earned money spent on those lemons, and they just—”

Dejected, Kihachi slumped. The children burst into laughter. “Well, clearly people would rather have the lemon than your stupid bomb,” Mitsue said, wiping tears from the corners of her eyes.

2.

“What are you talking about? The lemon battery component here is removable—it can even power other machines—”

As Kihachi continued explaining, the children jeered from a short distance away: “Think up something more useful!”

“Well then, there’s this item listed in the catalog: ‘Thirteen—Electric Catfish.’ It’s a machine shaped like a catfish; you put dishes or pots into its mouth, and using electricity, it vibrates the water inside to clean off grease and burnt residue in just seconds.”

Inako, watching Kihachi’s enthusiastic explanation from a little ways off, was bewildered, thinking to herself, *Such strange contraptions…* But beside her, Yajirō narrowed his eyes and said, “Still, Brother’s serious about it.”

“Kinako-nee, have you seen the tea maker?” When Inako nodded, Yajirō pointed at Ito, who was quietly giggling.

“Ito’s family has lots of younger brothers and sisters. Brother gathered materials and built that tea maker specially for her, so they could reduce the housework a bit.”

“He’s not satisfied with it though, since it doesn’t run on electricity,” Yajirō added.

“It was Brother who suggested the kimono shop next door buy a telephone too. The owner loves to chat, but his legs and back are weak. Brother said, ‘With a phone, you can talk to friends without having to go out.’”

As she listened to Yajirō, Inako gazed absentmindedly at Kihachi’s lively profile as he spoke warmly to the children.

“Brother always finds ways to make us happy.”

Inako had dozed off. Into her drowsy ears came the uneven sounds of sleeping breaths. She opened her heavy eyelids and saw the Night Study Meeting children piled atop one another, fast asleep across the tatami floor.

2.

She sat up. Outside the window, it was still dark, and Kihachi was fiddling with something at the desk lit by a lamp. Trying not to make a sound, she approached and peered over his shoulder. Kihachi was making the flashlight in his hands flicker on and off.

“Did you fix the flashlight?”

Startled by her sudden voice, Kihachi flinched visibly. “You were awake?”

“The spring inside was just weak. It’s an old flashlight, after all.”

Inako tucked a short strand of hair behind her ear and sat down beside Kihachi. He stared at her blankly, and when she tilted her head slightly in response, he quickly averted his gaze.

“Is something wrong with my hair?”

“…No. I was just thinking—how women don’t need to go to much trouble to wield their weapons. A simple gesture, and you catch a glimpse of the pale nape beneath the hair. Once you’ve seen that, even the toughest man is done for.”

Kihachi glanced briefly at Inako’s figure, then shook his head with an air of regret.

“But with a body like a soft *neri yōkan* sweet, maybe the nape is the only weapon you’ve got.”

Infuriated by the insult, she pinched him sharply in the side. Kihachi let out a pitiful yelp.

“I don’t care about my nape. I just wanted to grow my hair as long as my sister’s.”

“So you’d wear a schoolgirl’s *hishagami* topknot? This length is perfect—no need to tie it up every day, easy to wash. It’s the rational hairstyle of the new century.”

“Alright!” Kihachi slapped his hands together.

“From now on, this style shall be known as the ‘Twentieth Century Hair’!”

---

2.

“It makes no sense at all,” Inako said, utterly baffled—yet a moment later, she let out a small snort of laughter. “But anyway, thanks.” She smiled. Though she’d been feeling down since her hair was cut short, this was probably the first time she’d genuinely laughed.

Kihachi turned his face away, looking awkward, a single bead of sweat trailing down his temple—whether from the heat or embarrassment, it was hard to say. Inako pulled out a handkerchief, reaching to wipe the sweat from Kihachi’s brow, but he flinched back sharply.  
“What’s with you all of a sudden?”

“You were sweating so much, I thought I’d wipe it for you.”

“Didn’t you just use that handkerie to catch a mouse?”

“Oh yeah, I did,” Inako said, sticking out her tongue. The two burst into laughter at once.

“Still, I can’t get used to Kyoto’s muggy heat. I’d kill for a refrigerator right now.”

“A refrigerator?”

“A machine they displayed four years ago at the National Industrial Exhibition in Osaka. An entire building—just one giant machine for cooling things down. Inside, it was so cold I nearly froze to death, even though it was summer. At the entrance, there was a model of Mount Fuji, and the snow on its peak was made from ice chilled by the refrigerator itself. Now that was poetic.”

Kihachi lit the lamp of the magic lantern and slid in a new幻燈板. Outside the window, a colored photograph of Mount Fuji draped in snow shimmered into view, and Inako’s heart leapt at its beauty.

“These days we rely on the *Ryōfūki* and electric fans, but someday, we’ll have refrigerators that can cool entire houses. The kind of sweltering heat that makes Kyoto feel like hell will be nothing but a memory.”

And it’s not just that, Kihachi thought, glancing at the sleeping children.

2.

“Instead of lamps, if we use electric lights, there’ll be no need to clean the soot-stained firebox. Once we can easily boil water with electricity, people will be able to bathe every day. Then children won’t have to spend so much time helping out—they’ll be free to study or do what they love.”

“Can electricity really do all that?”

“—Electricity’s something you can live without anyway.”

Hearing those words—the very ones she’d once flung at Kihachi—Inako flinched.

Kihachi said with a wry smile, “I used to think the same way, y’know.”

“I didn’t understand electricity at all. When I was a kid, I even thought Asakusa’s *denki buran* was just fuel for electric lamps. Now that I think about it, what on earth does sake have to do with electricity, right?”

And with that, Kihachi let his smile soften.

“It was at the exhibition four years ago that I first came to understand the power electricity holds.”

“Did you see something like this magic lantern again?”

“No,” Kihachi shook his head. “Something far greater.”

“I saw Paradise.”

　　　　　　　　　　＊

The day he’d been taken by his older brother Seiroku to the Osaka exhibition. Seiroku had said, “I’ll be right back,” and gone to the toilet—but never returned. As dusk fell over the grounds, Kihachi remained alone, teetering on the edge of despair.

The exhibit halls that had enchanted him during the day now loomed as black silhouettes, seeming like giants intent on trapping him here forever. Or perhaps a kidnapper would emerge from the dispersing crowd and carry him off somewhere unknown. Kihachi crouched low on the ground, trembling, waiting endlessly for someone—anyone—to save him.

2.

That was the day he’d been taken by his older brother Seiroku to the Osaka exhibition. Seiroku had said, “I’ll be right back,” and gone to the toilet—but never returned. As dusk fell over the grounds, Kihachi remained alone, teetering on the edge of despair. The exhibit halls that had enchanted him during the day now loomed as black silhouettes, seeming like giants intent on trapping him here forever. Or perhaps a kidnapper would emerge from the dispersing crowd and carry him off somewhere unknown. Kihachi crouched low on the ground, trembling, waiting endlessly for someone—anyone—to save him.

Then, suddenly, the world beyond his tightly closed eyelids grew bright.

A warm, powerful light, rivaling the sun itself, spilled outward. From the surrounding crowd came a rising wave of murmurs and gasps of wonder.

What on earth was happening? A faint spark of curiosity stirred within Kihachi, and hesitantly, he began to open his eyes.

And at the sight that unfolded before him, Kihachi was utterly speechless.

Kihachi stood within a world of light.

Though night had fallen, the area was bathed in brightness so intense it felt like midday.

He rose to his feet and surveyed the grounds. The exhibition halls encircling the main avenue shimmered in golden radiance. Statues such as the Willow and Willow观音 and fountains cast off multicolored beams like rainbows. In this brilliant illumination, the ecstatic expressions of the crowd were clearly visible. Beside Kihachi, a middle-aged man, overcome with emotion, murmured softly:

“So this is the grand spectacle of the exhibition—*illumināshon*.”

Illumination.

Upon closer inspection, countless electric bulbs were affixed along the outer walls of the exhibition halls and main gate. It was the combined glow of these countless bulbs that had conjured this golden world.

As he stood dazed by the brilliance, an elderly woman nearby folded her wrinkled hands and reverently intoned, “Namu Amida Butsu,” bowing before the shimmering lights.

At that moment, everything Kihachi had seen and heard at the exhibition surged vividly through his mind:

The divine, heavenly breeze generated by the electric fan. The exquisite music played by the phonograph. The *Denki Hi Odori*, dazzling and radiant as celestial nymphs dancing.

2.

Bulbs were affixed along the outer walls of the exhibition halls and main gate. It was the combined glow of these countless bulbs that had conjured this golden world. As he stood dazed by the brilliance, an elderly woman nearby folded her wrinkled hands and reverently intoned, “Namu Amida Butsu,” bowing before the shimmering lights. At that moment, everything Kihachi had seen and heard at the exhibition surged vividly through his mind: The divine, heavenly breeze generated by the electric fan. The exquisite music played by the phonograph. The *Denki Hi Odori*, dazzling and radiant as celestial nymphs dancing.

And then—turning night into day—the boundless radiance of electricity.

“Ah… So this is Paradise.”

He was standing in the very realm of Paradise, a world he had never been able to imagine no matter how hard he tried.

“The twentieth century is the age of electricity! An age when even Paradise itself can be created with electricity!”

An inexhaustible vitality welled up from deep within his body. He had never felt anything like this before.

“I will create Paradise with electricity! If the world ahead lies in darkness, I’ll illuminate it with electric lamps!”

From his breast pocket, Kihachi pulled out the *Denki Mokuroku* and raised it toward the illumination display. Above the glowing grounds, the searchlight atop the Murai Brothers’ *Kōtō* swept the night sky in wide arcs.

Just as Kihachi was about to put the *Denki Mokuroku* away, a figure glimpsed through the crowd caught his eye. Instantly, his joy evaporated. Without a word, Kihachi dashed off.

Panting, he reached the flowerbed—and there, seated leisurely on a bench, Seiroku casually raised a hand. “Hey.”

“What… are you doing?”

“When I came out of the restroom, the illuminations had just started. They’re beautiful, so I stayed here to watch.”

“But you said you’d come right back…”

“Oh? Were you lonely?”

Seiroku showed no remorse. Kihachi rushed forward and pounded his thin chest fiercely with both fists.

Tears spilled from Kihachi’s eyes. He couldn’t tell whether they came from frustration, anger, or the overwhelming relief of no longer feeling alone.

2.

That very day, upon returning from the exhibition, just as expected, Enki’s fists rained down dozens of blows upon Kihachi’s head.

Yet Kihachi was so brimming with unprecedented vitality that not even Enki’s blows could faze him.

From then on, he threw himself into his studies at upper elementary school with renewed vigor, and thanks to the welling spring of imagination now surging within him, the catalog—previously half-empty—had already been filled up to entry number nineteen by the end of summer.

Just one left. One day, while carefully pondering what prophecy should occupy the final twentieth slot, Kihachi was summoned by Enki to discuss his future plans following his graduation from upper elementary school next year.

“…I’d assumed that after finishing upper elementary school, you’d take over the temple duties.”

Enki scratched his closely cropped hair impassively as Kihachi voiced his desire to attend middle school.

“As I’ve said before, we simply don’t have the money to send you to middle school.”

Kihachi had previously brought up his wish to continue his education, even before visiting the exhibition.

But last year, repairs to the main hall—which had suffered severe damage—ended up costing far more than anticipated. Offerings from parishioners hadn’t come in as hoped, forcing the temple to exhaust nearly all its savings. There was no longer any leeway to fund further schooling, and so the matter had been dropped.

“The temple will be mine eventually—I’ll inherit it. But that’s exactly why I want to study electricity. Electricity can make people’s lives easier. And for our parishioners who fear the afterlife, I can use electricity to create a vision of Paradise and show them what it’s truly like. That’s why I need to learn more—”

2.

“Now, what did you just say?”

Up until then calm, Enki’s demeanor abruptly shifted as he cut Sakamoto Kihachi off mid-sentence, his tone sharp and severe.

“Do you not believe in Amida-sama?”

Caught off guard by this unexpected reaction, Kihachi was flustered.

“I’m asking you—do you doubt the power of Amida? Answer me, you fool!”

Enki’s enraged voice shook the air itself, and Kihachi shrank back in fear.

“If you truly believe, Amida will surely lead all to the Pure Land. I’ve told you countless times: trying to save people through your own strength is doubting Amida’s power. And now—you dare speak of constructing Paradise with electricity?”

Enraged, Enki seized Kihachi by the collar and lifted him up.

“The very idea that you could utter such foolishness… Amida-sama, our ancestors, Akubi Ōmyōjin—they are all watching over you! How can you so calmly turn your back on them?”

In the force of being shoved away, the *Denki Mokuroku* slipped from Kihachi’s breast pocket. Before he could retrieve it, Enki snatched it up and flipped open its pages. As he leafed through it, his face began to twitch uncontrollably.

“So this is all you’ve been thinking about—such meaningless nonsense…”

Grabbing Kihachi roughly by the nape, Enki dragged him down the corridor into the kitchen. He shoved aside Kihachi’s mother Kei, who had been preparing lunch, and stood before the hearth. Realizing what Enki intended, Kihachi struggled desperately—but Enki showed no hesitation. He flung the *Denki Mokuroku* straight into the blazing fire beneath the stove.

“No—!”

His cry rang out in vain. In an instant, flames engulfed the *Denki Mokuroku*.

---

2.

Without a moment’s hesitation, Kihachi plunged his hand into the fire and snatched out the *Denki Mokuroku*, slapping the flames to extinguish them. But the booklet was already scorched in places, covered in ash, and parts of it had burned away entirely.

“You’ve gone too far this time—Kihachi doesn’t deserve this!”

“He’ll never wake up unless I do something drastic like this!”

As his parents argued, Kihachi felt their voices as if from some distant place, staring blankly at the ruined *Denki Mokuroku* in his hands. The searing pain in his burned fingers throbbed relentlessly, gnawing at him.

A few days later, Seiroku visited the house and, upon seeing the state of the *Denki Mokuroku*, muttered, “What a mess.”

“Hey, Kihachi. Mind if I take this catalogue off your hands for a while?”

“To you?” Kihachi asked dully.

“Yeah. If you keep holding onto it, your old man might just burn it again. Let me hang on to it until things cool down—and in the meantime, I’ll fix up the charred parts so they’re readable again.”

When Kihachi frowned skeptically, Seiroku gave a wry smile. “Trust me.”

Honestly, given what he knew of Seiroku up till now, Kihachi wasn’t sure whether he should hand it over so easily. Yet the thought of continuing to look at the damaged *Denki Mokuroku* pained him deeply.

“…Alright then. I’m counting on you. But make sure you return it. I still haven’t fulfilled the final prophecy yet.”

As Kihachi passed over the *Denki Mokuroku*, Seiroku flashed a grin, revealing his white teeth.

“Well, well. You’ve really gotten serious about this, huh?”

“I’m going to build Paradise with electricity,” Kihachi declared proudly.  
“I’ll bring every prophecy in the *Denki Mokuroku* to life—and prove to you, my own brother who doesn’t believe in Paradise, that it truly exists.”

2.

Seiroku looked taken aback, but quickly flashed a provocative grin.

“Go ahead then—if you can do it, do it.”

　　　　　　　　　　＊

Having finished speaking, Kihachi pulled several scraps of paper from the stack on his desk and handed them to Inako with a quiet “Here, read these.” Just like the previous *Yoru Shirazu*, the sheets were covered with diagrams and names of prophecies.

“*Number Seven: Denyaku Seisho*… A phonograph that automatically translates spoken foreign languages. *Number Fourteen: Denki-shiki Hakkudoku-mizu*… Water imbued with various flavors by electricity.”

As Inako skimmed through the prophecies, she suddenly felt a sense of unease.

“Didn’t you say the *Denki Mokuroku* was a bound booklet?”

“These papers I just gave you are only copies of the catalog… The original one hasn’t been returned yet.”

Inako instinctively raised her head. “Why not?”

“My brother—”

Kihachi hesitated mid-sentence, as if weighing his words. After a brief pause, he forced out the rest.

“My brother disappeared somewhere… taking the catalog with him.”

The lamplight flickered in Kihachi’s eyes. Inako wondered what could have happened between the two brothers, but sensed it was something she shouldn’t pry into, and held back from asking further.

“…My brother always hated the idea of succeeding the temple. Maybe he thought that if I kept going to school, he’d end up being forced to take over, so he took the catalog to make me give up my path with electricity.”

“But even if he disliked it, would he really do something so selfish?”

2.

“He was the kind of person who’d laugh mockingly every time he read the catalog. When I told him, ‘I’m going to create Paradise with electricity,’ he looked like he wanted to say, ‘There’s no way that’s possible.’”

Kihachi fixed a serious gaze on the copied *Denki Mokuroku* spread out on the table.

“It was so long ago—some of the prophecies must’ve slipped my mind. But if the catalog ever comes back, I’ll write down the final twentieth prophecy and complete it. Then I’ll fulfill every single one, just to prove myself to my brother.”

“Ahh, I see,” Kihachi murmured, as if coming to a private understanding, then gave Inako a strong, resolute smile.

“Creating Paradise with electricity… maybe that’s what gives my life meaning. Someday, I’ll fill this still-dark country with nothing but the light of electric lamps.”

His eyes shone with such brilliance that Inako couldn’t bear to look directly at them. She turned her gaze toward the window instead. Unnoticed, the pitch-black sky had begun to tint with blue; gradually, the outside world brightened, and the silhouette of the magic lantern’s Mount Fuji grew fainter, dissolving into the dawn.

“…I said I wanted to go to Paradise, but actually… there’s another place I really want to see.”

Her whisper was nearly inaudible, but Kihachi heard it. “Oh? Where’s that?”

“I’ve always wanted to see Mount Fuji once. My mother used to say there’s a spot nearby where you can see the real Mount Fuji.”

As Inako glanced sideways at the fading image of Fuji, Kihachi spoke hesitantly:  
“…About Inago’s mother… I’m sorry. Calling her a fraud back then… I shouldn’t have said that.”

2.

As the silhouette of the magic lantern’s Mount Fuji grew fainter, dissolving into the dawn, “I said I wanted to go to Paradise, but actually… there’s another place I really want to see.” Her whisper was nearly inaudible, but Kihachi heard it.  
“Oh? Where’s that?”  
“I’ve always wanted to see Mount Fuji once. My mother used to say there’s a spot nearby where you can see the real Mount Fuji.”  

As Inako glanced sideways at the fading image of Fuji, Kihachi spoke hesitantly:  
“…About Inago’s mother… I’m sorry. Calling her a fraud back then… I shouldn’t have said that.”  

Inako looked surprised. Kihachi puckered his lips and muttered, “I’d been meaning to apologize, but kept missing the chance.” Finally understanding why Kihachi had gone out of his way to come all the way to Fushimi, Inako smiled faintly.  

“You know… maybe when my mother told me about Mount Fuji, she wasn’t lying—maybe she just wanted to cheer me up.”  

Kihachi stared blankly, waiting for her to continue.  

“She always explained sake brewing in a way even children could understand… by using gods.”  

Mother had often told her: *There are countless invisible gods in sake.*  

These “gods” were none other than the essential koji mold and the yeasts dwelling within the brewery. In the kōjimuro, the koji mold was cultivated on steamed rice to make koji; through motosuri, yeast was nurtured. The “evil gods” that spoiled the sake were, in truth, unwanted microbes intruding during production. Among them, the bacteria known as *hi-ochi kin* were known to cause *hi-ochi* spoilage—but even now, its exact origin and reliable countermeasures remained poorly understood.  

“Even knowing the ‘gods’ behind sake are microbes, there’s still so much beyond human control. In the end, we can only believe in the power of the gods. Asking for more would anger them. Because my faith isn’t strong enough, Father and Onee-chan and all the kurabito suffered last time—I don’t want to burden them again.”  

“Inago…”  

“I may be slow, but I can finally be of use to the family. So I’ll stay here with Dr. Paikaru—”  

“Inago!”  

Suddenly, Kihachi thrust a one-sen coin right before Inako’s eyes.

---

2.

Staring wide-eyed at the coin, Inako blinked rapidly.

“When you helped drive off that fake *haibei*, you gave me this—consider it your offering money,” Kihachi said.

“The power of that offering still holds.”

 ——Instead of a god whose existence I can’t even be sure of, at least someone listened to my complaints.

Inako suddenly remembered Kihachi’s words at the Inari shrine—and her eyes slowly widened.

“I… I thought you were joking back then…”

“You can treat me as your god now. Before me, say whatever you want—no limits.”

“—No…”

She pressed her hands over her eyes, but couldn’t hold it in any longer. The flood surged forth all at once.

“No. I don’t want to. I don’t want to go back home. I don’t want to be with that person ever again.”

Plop. Plop. Heavy tears struck the tatami, one after another.

“I try every single day. I want to be good at housework and lessons like Onee-chan. But I can’t. No matter how hard I push myself, nothing turns out right. There’s something wrong with my head. Don’t say I’m ‘slow’—you don’t have to say it out loud. I know it better than anyone. *I know.*”

Outside, daylight crept stronger, and the image of Mount Fuji projected on the white wall began to fade.

A *genjō* cannot be seen in bright places.

“I hate this time of day. I never want morning to come. I don’t want anyone seeing me like this—looking foolish, being laughed at. I wish I could stay locked away in darkness forever. Because no matter what I do outside… I’ll only fail. Others will just find it funny and laugh. Or worse—they’ll only feel disappointed in me.”

---

2.

Inako’s face, flushed crimson, was soaked with tears, and her sobbing, along with the tears themselves, poured forth without end.

“I want to die. I don’t believe I can ever live properly again. I just want to disappear.”

Mount Fuji had completely vanished now, leaving only a blank white wall stretching across the space.

“I want to die, I want to die.”

Inako kept hurling those same words at the vanished mountain, over and over.

　　　　　　　　　　＊

Morning came. The members of the Night Study Meeting woke one by one, quickly ate a simple breakfast, and began cleaning up from the previous day.

Sadakichi silently polished the magic lantern; Itō scolded Yajiro for carelessly cleaning the phonograph; Mitsue swept listlessly, eyes half-dreaming as she gazed at Kihachi and Inako; Bunshichi smoked a morning cigarette while minding the shop.

Amid everyone going about their usual routines, Inako alone worked in silence, her face sunken and dark.

Kihachi had brought her here hoping it might lift her spirits even slightly—but the shadow she carried was so deep that not even a flashlight could illuminate its depths. Could he really send her back home like this?

As Kihachi agonized, an incongruously cheerful male voice cut through his thoughts: “Excuse me!”

Wondering who on earth would visit so early, he turned—only to see Inako freeze, her face turning deathly pale.

“That’s Dr. Paikaru’s voice.”

Startled, Kihachi raised a finger to his lips, signaling silence. He turned to Yajiro, who had just approached holding the phonograph, and whispered, “Brother, put that away somewhere,” before stepping down from the dais and peering cautiously from the living room into the shop area.

---

2.

In the sales area, a man wearing a high-crowned hat was speaking with Bunshichi.

When Bunshichi turned toward him, he beckoned: “Kihachi, this man has something for you.”

Could he have come to pick up Inako? Cautious, Kihachi stepped into the shop, only to see the man bow deeply and courteously.

“You must be Sakamoto Kihachi. My name is Mitsue Yōsuke, branch manager of the Fushimi branch of Mitsue Shōten.”

At Yōsuke’s sly, ingratiating smile, Kihachi asked coolly, “Are you here about a mechanical repair?”

“Mechanical? Ah, yes—I remember now. Your signboard says ‘Mechanical Repairs Undertaken.’”

“It’s true I can fix most machines, so people often come asking me to do repairs.”

“I see,” said Yōsuke, stroking his chin. “Just as one would expect from the owner of that extraordinary book, the *Denki Mokuroku*.”

“Huh—?”

Out of nowhere, those utterly unexpected words tumbled from Yōsuke’s mouth.

“The matter I’ve come about,” he continued, “is precisely that *Denki Mokuroku*.”

Bewildered, Kihachi could only stare as Yōsuke went on, saying something even more unbelievable.

“I’ll speak plainly. Would you sell the *Denki Mokuroku* to me?”

Kihachi froze, mouth agape. The words passed through one ear and out the other; only belatedly did their meaning sink into his mind. “Wha…?” he managed, his voice hollow and drained of air.

“The *Denki Mokuroku*. That prophecy you wrote, correct?”

“What are you talking about? That’s just some childish doodling.”

“No need to be modest. For business reasons, I absolutely must know what’s written in that catalog.”

---

2.

“is precisely that *Denki Mokuroku*.” Bewildered, Kihachi could only stare as Yōsuke went on, saying something even more unbelievable. “I’ll speak plainly. Would you sell the *Denki Mokuroku* to me?” Kihachi froze, mouth agape. The words passed through one ear and out the other; only belatedly did their meaning sink into his mind. “Wha…?” he managed, his voice hollow and drained of air. “The *Denki Mokuroku*. That prophecy you wrote, correct?” “What are you talking about? That’s just some childish doodling.” “No need to be modest. For business reasons, I absolutely must know what’s written in that catalog.”

Yōsuke deepened his contemptuous smile and leaned in. “To be precise,” he said, “it’s *Number Twenty* of the *Denki Mokuroku*. The prophecy written there—that’s what matters.”

“…Number Twenty…?”

Kihachi struggled to make sense of the situation, his mind reaching the peak of confusion.  
He’d thought Yōsuke had come to reclaim Inako—but instead, he was here to buy the *Denki Mokuroku*, something only his family should know about.  
This man claimed he needed to know the contents of the twentieth prophecy—a prophecy Kihachi didn’t even remember writing—for business purposes.  
Rather than clarifying anything, the situation only grew more bewildering. Kihachi almost laughed. What on earth was going on?

“Even if you spring this on me out of nowhere… besides, I don’t have the *Denki Mokuroku* on me right now.”

“No?” Yōsuke’s face, still fixed in a smile, visibly darkened with displeasure. “Don’t lie. I know for a fact that you have it.”

“It’s not a lie. And anyway, how do *you* even know about the *Denki Mokuroku*?”

“That’s none of your concern. You just need to accept what we’re asking.”

His condescending tone made Kihachi instantly understand why Inako had refused to marry him—after only a few minutes together, it was clear.

“In any case, asking for something I don’t have is unreasonable.”

The matter of the *Denki Mokuroku* troubled him, but Kihachi had no desire to get further involved with this man. And if Yōsuke caught on to Inako’s presence, things would become complicated. He wanted him gone—fast.

“Fine. I’ll come again. Be ready with a proper answer next time.”

Just as Yōsuke turned on his heel, Kihachi began to let out a sigh of relief—

2.

“By the way,” Yōsuke suddenly turned back, making Kihachi’s blood run cold.

“You know Hundred Rivers Inako, don’t you? Didn’t you meet her yesterday?”

“…No, I didn’t. Is something wrong with her?”

“She ran away from home yesterday and hasn’t returned. She should be making contact by now.”

“Do you have any idea why she might’ve run away?”

When Kihachi subtly implied Yōsuke’s marriage to her, Yōsuke frowned in clear annoyance.

“No idea. Who can understand the thoughts of someone so bizarre?”

In that instant, the last trace of Kihachi’s polite customer-service demeanor vanished completely from his face.

“…Weren’t you the one supposed to marry her?”

Yōsuke’s eyes widened. “You know about that?”  
Kihachi instantly regretted speaking—had he said too much?

“I overheard it recently. Is it really proper to speak so ill of the woman you’re going to marry?”

“Well, think about it. Who else but me would willingly marry a useless woman like that?”

Yōsuke exaggeratedly shrugged his shoulders. It was meant to be a joke, but Kihachi didn’t even crack a smile. On the contrary, a slow, creeping heat began to rise behind his temples.

“This marriage is practically an act of charity. Don’t you think I’m admirable?”

Throbbing, throbbing—the image flashing through his increasingly heated mind was Inako’s face:  
Her furious expression when she desecrated the sacred mound. The look of stunned disbelief as she chased off the fake *haibei*. Her oft-seen, narrow-eyed stare of utter exasperation. And the profile she made when tucking short hair behind her ear—a face reminiscent of Noriko.

2.

“Thank you,” her smiling face.

And then, the face that wept, sobbing, “I want to die.”

“Inako-chan only *seems* like a good girl—truth is, she’s surprisingly arrogant. For someone so useless, she’s awfully picky about men. When I could’ve picked from any number of candidates, I went and chose her specially.”

This conversation must have reached the living room where Inako was sitting. Along with Yōsuke’s words, laced with malice.

What kind of expression did Inako wear right now?

“Oops, I’ve chatted too long. Well then, I’ll be off,” Yōsuke said, turning away again.

Kihachi wasn’t acting on any clear thought. His head burned too fiercely to think at all. The next moment, he shouted impulsively, “Wait just a minute!”

Yōsuke turned back with an annoyed look. Kihachi naturally clenched both fists tightly.

“The *Denki Mokuroku* isn’t gone—it’s simply not in my possession right now.”

When Kihachi glared, voice sharpened, Yōsuke twitched his eyebrows slightly.

“It’s being kept at my family home in Ōtsu. I’ll go retrieve it and deliver it to Dr. Paikaru myself.”

“Oh? How generous. Then payment will be handed over upon successful receipt—”

“No,” Kihachi cut in sharply. “I don’t want money.”

Yōsuke tilted his head, puzzled.

“Instead, call off your engagement to Hyakugawa Inako.”

Yōsuke’s face twisted openly. “What did you say?”

“I think the marriage has nothing to do with you. …Unless, perhaps, you’re—”

Yōsuke smirked defiantly, then broke off. “Never mind. Saying it would be in poor taste.”

2.

“So what will Dr. Paikaru do about it?”  
Yōsuke studied Kihachi carefully, then nodded. “Fine.”  
“If you can prepare the *Denki Mokuroku* by the wedding ceremony five days from now, I’ll cancel my engagement to Inako-chan.”  
He sneered mockingly, as if to say, *Are you satisfied now?*  
“Then by that deadline, I will deliver the *Denki Mokuroku* to Dr. Paikaru.”  
“I’ll hold you to it. Well, I’m looking forward to it.”  
With those condescending words, Yōsuke swiftly turned and left.  

Soon after, the members of the Night Study Meeting tumbled noisily out from the back of the living room. “What’s with that guy, with his sideburns,” “Mountain-high hat,” each grumbled in irritation—except Inako, who wore a troubled expression.  

“Well then…” Kihachi cheerfully slapped his palm with his fist.  
“What should we do next?”  
The children chorused, “Huh?”  

“You made such a promise ’cause you’ve got some idea where it is, right?”  
“Just bluffing. If I really knew, I’d’ve gone and gotten it ages ago.”  

Kihachi could only offer a wry smile at the impasse—when suddenly, Bunshichi cut in.  
“Well then, how ‘bout this—if you actually went back to Ōtsu? It’s about time for the *yabuiri* season, so I’ll give you time off.”  

Bunshichi raised one eyebrow expectantly. Kihachi grimaced.  
“…You want me to just waltz back into the house I ran away from three years ago, like nothing happened?”  
“It was three years ago, wasn’t it? They might welcome you back without much fuss. And besides—maybe Seiroku had a reason to hide the catalog somewhere inside the house.”  

2.

Kihachi folded his arms and grunted. No matter how hard he racked his brain, he couldn’t figure out why Yōsuke had known about the *Denki Mokuroku*, nor what this twentieth prophecy—something he’d never even written—could possibly be.

Then again… Could Seiroku, who had once kept the catalog, be somehow involved?

“…I’ve no intention of being tossed around blindly without knowing a thing.”

Kihachi exhaled deeply, set his face firmly, and spoke to Bunshichi, who was smirking faintly.  
“Uncle, I’m heading to Ōtsu right now—for *yabuiri* season.”

“You don’t need to do that.”

Inako cut in, her voice sharp, fists clenched tightly at her sides. The corners of her eyes were red and damp.  
“You don’t want to go back home. Don’t force yourself for my sake.”

“But Inako-san,” Mitsue said, her face as if facing the end of the world, “if the catalog really exists, the wedding will be called off. Isn’t that what you want? You hate the marriage, don’t you?”

“If I don’t endure this, it won’t just be the household—I’ll bring shame upon Sakamoto-san too.”

There was a painful stiffness in Inako’s words, like someone forcing themselves to walk on an injured leg.  
“If I keep acting selfishly… divine retribution will strike.”

　　　　　　　　　　＊

After Itō, Mitsue, and Sadakichi—children of Kyoto—had returned home, Inako, Kihachi, and Yajirō stood at the Keiden stop in Nijō-Kitayama. This was a transfer point between the Higashimawari Line and the Ōtō Line bound for Okazaki, and right beside it stood the workshop of “Japan’s Edison.”  

“Kinako-nee, are you really going back? Come with us to Ōtsu instead.”

2.

Inako did not answer. Instead, she gently stroked Yajirō’s head as the East Loop Line train arrived from the north. That train would take her back to Fushimi. She bowed deeply to Kihachi, who stood silently facing forward.

“Sakamoto-san… thank you for everything.”

When the train stopped at the platform, passengers began shuffling off one after another. Then Kihachi, who had been silent until now, spoke in a flat, toneless voice:

“You said earlier—‘divine retribution will strike,’ didn’t you?”

“If something terrible happens, who can prove it was the will of God or Buddha?”

“God exists. Even if we’re slow to understand, we must believe and wait. We can only pray and wait, hoping God will hand us rice cakes from the shelf like manna from heaven.”

No more passengers were getting off. Inako leapt onto the train as if fleeing.

“I think it’s better to reach up and grab the shelf yourself, rather than wait forever for a rice cake you might never receive.”

The train bell rang—ding, ding.

“If you look for yourself, you might find something good on that shelf besides rice cakes.”

Inako pretended not to hear. If she didn’t, she knew she wouldn’t be able to withstand his kindness. With a final, determined effort to break away, she called out, “Well then… I’ll repay you someday,” just as the train began to move.

“Inago’s mother didn’t lie.”

The East Loop Line train pulled away from the stop. Without realizing it, Inako had stepped back onto the platform. She now stood face to face with Kihachi, whose expression was utterly serious.

“There’s a place nearby where you can see Mount Fuji. I know it.”

“What do you mean?”

2.

“Besides rice cakes.” Inako pretended not to hear. If she acknowledged it, she knew she wouldn’t be able to withstand his kindness. With one final, determined effort to break away, she called out, “Well then… I’ll repay you someday,” just as the train began to move. “Inago’s mother didn’t lie.” The East Loop Line train pulled away from the stop. Without realizing it, Inako had stepped back onto the platform. She now stood face to face with Kihachi, whose expression was utterly serious.

“There’s a place nearby where you can see Mount Fuji. I know it.”

“What do you mean?”

「If you come with me, I’ll show you that spot. Doesn’t interest you?」

This time, the Kantō Line tram approached. It was the tram Kihachi and the others were meant to take.

“I’ll show you the Mount Fuji that Inago’s mother talked about.”

The metallic screech of wheels against the tracks carried a sound that somehow stirred urgency within Inako’s heart.

“…Why? Why do you care so much about me, Sakamoto-san?”

Kihachi suddenly leaned in close, his face nearly before hers, and Inako felt a ticklish sensation deep in her chest.

“Your eyes don’t have any light in them.”

“…Huh?”

“Inago shows all kinds of expressions, but her eyes stay dark. I told you before—I’m here to brighten the world. And I want to light up those eyes of yours.”

“Inako-kun!”

A firm, resonant voice thundered across the space, and from the far side of Kitayama-dōri, Roku came sprinting toward them.

“That guy definitely rubbed his butt on the tram earlier…” Kihachi murmured, stunned into silence. Trams moved at a speed humans could catch if they ran full tilt. At that distance, Roku would surely reach them.

But suddenly, right in front of Roku, a pile of lumber propped against a timber merchant’s wall toppled sideways.

“Sorry! We were playing and knocked it over!”

From the shadow of the building emerged Itō and Mitsu—supposedly already gone home. As they frantically bowed their heads to Roku, Sadakichi, standing beside them, delivered a perfectly convincing fake cry while secretly winking at Inako and the others.

The tram came to a halt at the stop. While Roku was occupied clearing the fallen timber, Yajirō boarded first, followed by Kihachi, who then turned and extended his hand toward Inako.

“So—will you join us, or not?”

2.

The hand that had pulled her out of the storehouse. But this time, there was no sign of anyone reaching for her from that side.

“Or,” Kihachi said, flashing a provocatively playful smile,  
“you don’t trust what I’m saying?”

Ding, ding—the bell chimed. The tram slowly began to move, and Kihachi’s hand slipped away.

“Trusting is what Inago’s good at, isn’t it?”  

Believing in the gods—that was her one defining trait. If she lost that, what would be left of her?

“I’m getting on!”

Inako took a bold step forward and reached her hand toward Kihachi.

Without hesitation, Kihachi seized her wrist and yanked her up forcefully. Stumbling a few steps inside, Inako stepped fully onto the tram and burst into lively laughter.

“Trusting’s my specialty. You won’t make a fool of me.”

“Fair enough,” Kihachi laughed back.

The tram steadily picked up speed, crossing the Kamo River lined with open-air summer dining platforms—*ryōbata*.  

Sunlight poured evenly into the car. Perhaps because she’d been shut away in the dark storehouse for so long, the scenery outside seemed brighter than ever before.

